---
layout: post
published: false
comments: true
permalink: /:categories/:year/:month/:day/
categories: [journal]
---

If you have a bunch of disease trajectories \\(D1 \to D2 \to D3\\) for many different patients, how do identify common disease "patterns"?

What do we mean by "pattern"? We mean a sequence of diseases. 
* Longer patterns are of more interest than shorter patterns
* The patterns may not repeat exactly in every patient. We will allow for some additions/deletions/substitutions from the base pattern 
* Common patterns are of more interest 

Shortcomings with existing techniques: 
1. https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms5022
* Has three separate steps: first identifying common disease transitions, then secondly * combine those to get longer disease transitions * then go through and count how often each of the longer disease transitions occur. This is not very efficient, especially if longer trajectories are desired and there are a large number of sub-trajectories or there are a large number of patients, since you need to make multiple passes
2. TRACLUS: http://hanj.cs.illinois.edu/pdf/sigmod07_jglee.pdf
* Designed for 2D continuous trajectories, they also use DBSCAN. We basically have a clever way of doing it for discrete trajectories by generating a similarity matrix based on occurrences of disease transitions. 

-----

Let me propose an algorithm, Distrafi, a method that can automatically find common disease trajectory exemplars from multi-million patient datasets. The nice thing about distrafi is that it's fast, completely automatic, takes in a couple of very intuitive parameters, and can be extended to contrastive analysis. How does it work?

- It takes into account a measure of similarity between two disease trajectories: s = |t1 U t2| (actually the intersection)
- It takes as a parameter that is the min similarity, eps 
- It takes as a parameter that is the number of other patients that should be within eps for a particular trajectory to be considered a core trajectory
- It takes a sign vector (by default all 1s) that says how to weight the presence of a particular patient. For contrastive analysis, we do 1s and -1s
